Now that I've given you an
overview of the complete Java
completable future
API, we'll start
walking through each of
its groupings of methods
and showing how they can
be applied in practice.
We'll start with the
basic features in the Java
completable futures framework.
There's a number of basic
completable futures features.
Naturally these largely
support the future API,
which a completable
future class implements.
So, for example, we can
time block and poll.
We can cancel and test to see
if completable futures are
canceled and done.
Strangely enough
cancel doesn't actually
interrupt the computation.
You can take a look at the
link at the bottom of this page
for more discussion about this.
It's very peculiar.
There are ways of making it
work, but it doesn't do it--
it doesn't do this
by default. So
as a consequence calling
cancel on a completable future
will cause the completable
future to ignore
the results of the computation,
but the computation
will still keep running,
which is a little bit wacky.
There's also a few extra
things have been added.
They're still in the same
spirit of the basic features,
but they take away
some of the downsides
with the earlier versions
of the future interface.
One such method is
the join method.
And this method
behaves like the get
method on the future
interface, but it does not
use checked exceptions.
And therefore you can
use it very nicely
as a method reference in a
Java stream as I show here.
So you might have
a futures list.
We turn it into a
stream of futures.
We may end up going
ahead and joining
all of those completable
futures in order
to be able to get
their actual results
and then collect those
results into a list.
So that's really clean.
In contrast, if you tried
to use the future get
method or the completable
future get method,
it would look
something like this.
It would require the use of
explicit try catch exceptions
to deal with a
checked exception.
And that's very ugly
in a Java stream.
There are ways
around this by using
type laundering and exceptional
laundering and so on,
but it's really not
worth it a lot of times
unless you're really desperate.
There's also oddly enough
no timed version of join.
So unlike get, where there's
a timed version of get,
there's no time version of join.
Not quite sure why
but there isn't.
So if you need time outs
and time out support,
you're going to have
to go back to using
get with its checked
exception wackiness.
You can also explicitly
complete a completable future.
I showed you an example
of how to do that earlier.
Here's that example
again just very
quickly where you can
go ahead and create
a completed future that has no
computation associated with it.
You could create
and start a thread
to run some operation
in the background.
In parallel to that, you
could run some other code.
And then when the background
computation was finished,
you could explicitly
complete the future,
which means that any
calls to join will unblock
or would never block
in the first place
if they haven't been called yet.
There are some uses of complete.
We'll see later that
it's often better
to use other features
than this simple feature,
but it does, in fact, work.
One of the things you can
also do, which is fun,
is there's a method called
completed future, where
you can give it a value
and it creates a completed
future from the value, which is
done as far as we're concerned.
So anytime you go ahead
and call join on it,
it will just go ahead
and return instantly
and will not end up blocking.
So this actually turns out to
be somewhat useful for creating
various constant
completable futures
like a completable future
that represents the value 0.
And we'll actually see a use of
this in one of our example case
study programs called
the image counter later.